Assessment of Professional Competence
Candidate guide
February 2022 


2
Candidate guide
Published by: RICS, Parliament Square, London SW1P 3AD. 
All rights in this publication, including full copyright or publishing right, content and design, are owned 
by RICS, except where otherwise described. Any dispute arising out of this publication is subject to the 
law and jurisdiction of England and Wales


3
Candidate guide
APC candidate guide
Entry requirements................................................................................................................5
Introduction to the APC.........................................................................................................6
Pathways...................................................................................................................................6
Essential guides.......................................................................................................................6
The people involved in your APC........................................................................................6
Competencies..........................................................................................................................7
Your experience
Structured training.................................................................................................................9
No structured training.........................................................................................................11
Continuing Professional Development (CPD)...........................................................12
Rules of Conduct.................................................................................................................13
Submissions
Summary of experience......................................................................................................14
Case study submission........................................................................................................14
Important notes on your submission..............................................................................16
Preliminary review.............................................................................................................17


4
Candidate guide
Final assessment interview 
Purpose...................................................................................................................................18
Structure.................................................................................................................................19
Audit and quality assurance.............................................................................................. 20
Conflict of interest............................................................................................................... 20
After the assessment.......................................................................................................... 21
Help and support............................................................................................................... 22


5
Candidate guide
Entry requirements 
RICS recognises that a mix of academic and professional qualifications with relevant experience 
provide the skills and levels of competence to become a chartered surveyor. The eligibility 
requirements to begin the APC are:
•	
RICS accredited degree – At least 24 months’ structured training and a minimum of 96 
hours’ Continuing Professional Development (CPD).
•	
RICS accredited degree with a minimum of 5 years’ relevant experience – At least  
12 months’ structured training and a minimum of 48 hours’ Continuing Professional  
Development (CPD).
•	
RICS accredited degree with a minimum of 10 years’ relevant experience – 
Demonstrate a minimum of 48 hours’ Continuing Professional Development (CPD) over the 
preceding 12 months. No structured training period required.
•	
Bachelor degree or higher (or membership of an RICS approved professional body) 
with a minimum of 5 years’ relevant experience (at least 12 months must be post 
qualification) – Successfully complete the preliminary review and a minimum of 48 hours’ 
Continuing Professional Development (CPD).
If you need further information on any of the entry requirements for the APC please refer to  
rics.org/apc or your local RICS office.


6
Candidate guide
Introduction
Assessment of 
Professional 
Competence (APC) 
The Assessment of Professional Competence 
(APC) ensures that candidates are competent 
and meet the high standards of professionalism 
required to become a chartered surveyor.
The APC is based on candidates achieving a set 
of requirements and competencies. These are 
a mix of technical and professional practice, 
interpersonal, business and management 
skills. Completing the APC and the professional 
interview successfully leads to professional 
qualification with RICS and the much sought 
after letters – MRICS.
Commitment is key
When you enrol as a candidate, you are making 
a commitment to become a chartered surveyor 
(MRICS). You have 6 years from your date of 
enrolment to achieve the MRICS qualification.
This guide will help you prepare for the APC. 
Although there will be people to support  
you through your APC, it is your responsibility  
to make sure you start and remain committed  
to the assessment.
Pathways
You will need to choose your pathway. A 
pathway is the area of the profession that you 
wish to qualify in. This needs to be based on 
your qualifications, experience and current 
job role. For more information visit rics.org/
pathway
Essential guides
From the beginning of your APC there are key 
documents that you need to download and 
read. You need to continue to refer to these 
throughout your training, preparation and 
assessment. The documents can all be found at 
rics.org/apc
•	
Pathway guide – the guide that is specific  
to the pathway you have selected to follow.  
It details the competencies you will need 
to meet and provides examples of the 
knowledge and activities that fall within the 
scope of  
each competency.
•	
Self-assessment form – this is a pathway 
specific document that is designed to 
help you understand where your skills 
and experience match the pathway 
requirements and your areas to develop.
These guides are generic and apply to all world 
regions. 
The people involved 
in your APC
These are the people who will influence and 
support your progress towards achieving  
RICS membership.
You: You must commit to following the process 
through from beginning to end. You must 
familiarise yourself with the guidance and 
abide by it, planning and organising your time 
conscientiously. You must take responsibility 
for your own CPD, undertaking independent 
learning.
Your employer: Your employer should 
encourage you and make facilities and time 
available to you to complete your assessment 
documents. Some employers may not be able to 
give you access to the full range of experience 
needed. If this is the case you may need to gain 
a temporary secondment to supplement your 
experience.
Your counsellor: Your assessment must be 
supported by a member of RICS. They must be 
satisfied that you have achieved the required 
levels in all the competencies needed for your 
chosen pathway.
Your counsellor should support you through 
your training. They may not have personal 
knowledge of your experience in all the chosen 
competencies as you may have achieved some 
of them a number of years ago or in a different 
job. They will still be able to support you and 
verify your experience by having discussions 
with you about your experience.


7
Candidate guide
Your supervisor (optional): Best practice is 
to have someone overseeing your day-to-day 
activities, who is responsible for giving you 
guidance and support. This is particularly 
important if you are completing a period of 
structured training.
It is important we hold your most up-to-
date details. If your employer, supervisor or 
counsellor changes at any point during your 
APC please contact your local office to update 
the details.
The assessors: chartered surveyors who 
conduct your final assessment interview.  
The interview panel has a minimum of two 
members. All assessors are specially trained  
for this purpose.
Your local support team: can provide advice 
on completing your APC and can help you 
source training, CPD and counsellors. Find 
contact details at rics.org/contactus
Competencies
To be competent to practise as an RICS  
member you must have the skill and/or ability  
to perform a variety of tasks or functions. The  
RICS competencies are not only a list of tasks  
or functions, they are also based upon 
attitudes and behaviours.
RICS has drawn up competencies in a generic  
way so that they can be applied to different  
areas of practice and geographical locations.  
It is important that you interpret them within  
the context of your own area of practice or 
specialism and geography.
The competencies are in two distinct categories
Mandatory competencies – personal, 
interpersonal, professional practice and business 
skills common to all pathways and compulsory  
for all candidates.
Technical competencies which are split into
•	
Core competencies – primary skills of your 
chosen pathway
•	
Optional competencies – selected as 
additional skill requirements for your 
pathway from a list of competencies relevant  
to that pathway.
Each competency is defined at three levels of 
attainment. You must reach the required level in  
a logical progression and in successive stages.
Level 1 – knowledge and understanding
Level 2 – application of knowledge and 
understanding
Level 3 – reasoned advice and depth of 
knowledge.
Level 1 – Knowledge and 
understanding
You will be required to explain what learning/
training you have done, and when, to gain  
level 1 competency.
This may have been through formal education 
and/or formal training in the workplace or on-
the-job experience. If your degree is relevant 
to your chosen pathway, you can draw on this 
to indicate how you have gained the required 
knowledge.
Alternatively, you may have developed your 
knowledge and understanding through 
targeted formal training. Formal training could 
include online courses, in-house seminars or 
workshops, distance learning, academic study, 
day-release programmes, structured learning 
or mentoring. You may have participated in 
a training programme developed by your 
employer or in partnership with a training 
provider.
In order to reduce the number of words used,  
you can provide a list but you should include  
some brief detail, if necessary, to ensure that  
the assessor can be confident the education/
training is relevant to the competency. You can 
also link this to your CPD record.


8
Candidate guide
Level 2 – Application of 
knowledge and understanding
You will need to be able to show how you have 
put your knowledge and understanding into 
practice. Briefly review your career and the 
activities you have performed that are relevant 
to this competency. The following may help you 
to structure your thoughts in regard to level 2 
competencies:
•	
refer to projects you have been involved in
•	
identify the type of client - but be aware of 
your clients’ confidentiality.
You can describe companies, buildings or land  
in financial terms (revenue, value) or in terms of  
size (large, small), area (floor size, levels, capacity) 
or location
•	
describe your own role
•	
explain how your involvement demonstrates 
your practical competence
•	
provide specific examples.
Level 3 – Reasoned advice and 
depth of knowledge
Where the pathway requires level 3 to be 
achieved, you will need to be able to explain the 
professional advice you have given to clients. 
Provide specific examples that describe the 
nature of the advice, the options you considered 
and the outcome.
The advice should be predominantly your 
individual responsibility, rather than collective.  
It should demonstrate that you are working with 
minimum supervision.
The advice should have financial or strategic 
implications for the client, and should be given 
on behalf of your firm in order to fulfil your 
contractual obligations to the client.
You must satisfy yourself and your counsellor 
that you have reached the required level of 
experience before applying for final assessment.
Choosing your competencies
It is important that you give careful thought to 
your choice and combination of competencies. 
Your choice will inevitably reflect the work you 
do in your day-to-day environment (driven 
by the needs of your clients/employer). Your 
choice and combination of competencies will be 
a reflection of your judgement.
At the final assessment interview, the assessors 
will take these choices into account. They will 
expect you to present a sensible and realistic 
choice that reflects the skills needed to fulfil the 
role of a professional in your area of practice 
and geographical location.


9
Candidate guide
5
7
2
1
4
6
3
Structured training
This section is for candidates who hold:
•	
an RICS accredited degree – up to 5 years’ 
relevant experience; or
•	
an RICS accredited degree – 5–10 years’ 
relevant experience (pre-degree experience  
can count).
APC structured training requires you to 
demonstrate how you have gained the skills 
and abilities needed to perform specific tasks 
or functions. The competencies are based on 
attitudes and behaviours as well as skills and 
knowledge. Your training must be structured 
to allow you to gain the required experience to 
enable you to achieve the competencies for your 
pathway.
Throughout the APC your counsellor (and 
supervisor, if appointed) will need to continually 
monitor your progress. You will not be able to 
apply for the final assessment interview until 
your counsellor (and supervisor) certifies that, 
in their opinion, you have reached the level of 
competence required and have fulfilled the 
minimum training period. If you have less than 5 
years’ experience you are required to complete 
a minimum of 24 months’ (400 days’) structured 
training to meet the competency requirements. 
If you have between 5 years’ and 10 years’ 
experience you will be required to complete a 
minimum of 12 months’ (200 days’) structured 
training to meet the competency requirements.
Your experience
Your record-keeping
As soon as you enrol on to the APC, you should 
start recording your experience in the APC diary 
template. You will use the information from your 
diary to complete your summary of experience.
Your diary should be a record of your day to day 
experience in the workplace. You should not 
record a period of less than half a day.
While level 1 may not be pratical experience, 
it is permitted to record level 1 in your diary 
- it is valuable learning that you will able to 
apply in practice and, as noted on page 7, may 
have been gained in formal education and/or 
formal training in the workplace or on-the job 
experience.
Level 1 knowledge provides assessors with 
good evidence of your understanding,  but it 
is important to ensure that your structured 
training period to reflects mainly level 2 (the 
application of the knowledge and understanding 
you have gained) and level 3 (providing reasoned 
advice and depth of knowledge).  
There is no specified number of days you should 
record against each level; this is a judgement 
for you, your counsellor and supervisor (if 
appointed). 
You do not need to record the mandatory 
competencies in your diary. These are an 
intrinsic part of your day-to-day work and are 
not normally part of the minimum days of 
experience. However, you must record your 
attainment of the mandatory competencies 
in your summary of experience for final 
assessment. Section 6 details what is required 
for your summary of experience.
At the end of 11 or 23 months (minimum) you 
can apply for final assessment.
You will then sit your final assessment interview 
after month 12 or 24, depending on which level 
of structured training you need to complete.
Day-to-day
Your supervisor and counsellor must keep in  
regular contact with you, with formal meetings  
at least every three/six months, but ultimately 
you  
are responsible for your day-to-day activities. 
You must:
•	
ensure your day-to-day work covers the  
required competencies of your pathway
•	
keep your diary in a format that will 
encourage meaningful discussion at the 
formal quarterly reviews of progress against 
the competencies and will assist with the 
preparation of your assessment records
•	
discuss before, and evaluate after, 
any planned training or professional 
development events
•	
keep notes of examples of practical 
experience and casework to assist at your 
quarterly reviews.


10
Candidate guide
5
7
2
1
4
6
3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
 
Month
Earliest date for final 
assessment interview
Begin identifying suitable 
project(s) for case study
Case study – identify and 
agree subject, prepare 
synopsis, discuss with 
supervisor/counsellor
3-month supervisor’s meeting
APC enrolment
9-month supervisor’s meeting
6-month supervisor’s meeting
6-month counsellor’s meeting
Supervisor and counsellor 
appointed. Start recording 
experience and CPD
Case study complete
11-month final assessment 
meeting with supervisor and
counsellor; earliest date to 
apply for final assessment
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
 
23-month final assessment 
meeting with supervisor and 
counsellor; earliest date to 
apply for final assessment
Month
Earliest date for final 
assessment interview
Begin identifying suitable 
project(s) for case study
Case study – identify and 
agree subject, prepare 
synopsis, discuss with 
supervisor/counsellor
3-month supervisor’s meeting
APC enrolment
9-month supervisor’s meeting
15-month supervisor’s 
meeting
6-month supervisor’s meeting
6-month counsellor’s meeting
12-month supervisor’s 
meeting
12-month counsellor’s 
meeting
18-month counsellor’s 
meeting
18-month supervisor’s 
meeting
Supervisor and counsellor 
appointed. Start recording 
experience and CPD
Case study complete
24-month structured training calendar
12-month structured training calendar


11
Candidate guide
5
7
2
1
4
6
3
This section is relevant to candidates who fit the 
following criteria:
•	
RICS accredited degree – minimum of 10 
years’ relevant experience (pre-degree 
experience can count); or
•	
Bachelor degree – minimum of 5 years’ 
relevant experience (at least 12 months  
(200 days) must be post qualification); or
•	
RICS approved professional body 
membership + a minimum of 5 years’ 
relevant experience (at least 12 months (200 
days) must be post qualification).
Firstly, use your pathway guide to help you 
complete the self-assessment form; this lists 
the core and optional competencies for your 
chosen pathway. Against each one, record the 
level you need to achieve. Map your experience 
against each of these competencies at each 
level; are  you able to provide similar examples? 
Based on the outcome of this exercise you need 
to decide your declared competencies in line 
with your pathway requirements.
No structured training 
You will need to spend some time discussing 
your career, relevant experience and chosen 
competencies with your counsellor. Decide 
if you both agree you have chosen the most 
appropriate competencies that reflect the work 
you do in your day-to-day environment. 
If you identify any shortfalls in your experience, 
agree with your counsellor the most appropriate 
way of addressing them.
As you continue building your experience to 
meet all the competency requirements and 
completing your assessment submissions, you 
should meet with your supervisor/counsellor 
every 3 to 6 months. This helps to ensure you 
are progressing in the right direction and have 
their support and feedback on your summary of 
experience and case study.
    


12
Candidate guide
5
7
2
1
4
6
3
Continuing Professional Development (CPD)
CPD is the systematic updating and 
enhancement of skills, knowledge and 
competence that takes place throughout your 
working life. It should be closely linked to your 
current work.
CPD can be taken from various sources including 
attending conferences, meetings or seminars, 
completing an academic course or informal 
reading.
It is for you, as a professional, to decide what is 
appropriate and this should complement both 
your mandatory and technical competencies.
Special attention must be given to the 
principles underpinning CPD:
•	
gained in a structured manner
•	
based on an explicit process of selecting, 
planning and evaluating the activities
•	
reflect learning from informal training 
sources e.g. structured reading, 
secondments
All APC candidates are required to complete a 
minimum of 48 hours’ CPD every 12 months.
Please note that during your interview, part  
of the discussion will focus on your CPD.
If you are undertaking structured training you 
must complete a minimum of 48 hours per 12 
months of structured training.
If you are not required to complete structured 
training, you need to demonstrate a minimum 
of 48 hours in the 12 months prior to your 
preliminary review and update your record 
to reflect the requirement prior to your final 
assessment submission.
Your CPD must be split between formal 
development such as professional courses, 
seminars or online events and informal 
development such as private study or on the 
job training. At least 50% of your CPD must be 
dedicated to formal development. For more 
information on the types of formal and informal 
CPD please go to rics.org/cpd
If you are on a part-time or distance learning 
accredited degree, RICS will consider your final 
year as counting towards your CPD for that year. 
This should be supplemented by other CPD 
activities for that year.
Your CPD will be calculated on a rolling period 
from the date you submit for assessment. 
You should check that your CPD activities are 
within the required period (12 or 24 months), 
working back from the date you submit.
Once you have been successful and become 
an RICS chartered professional (MRICS) you 
will continue to undertake and record online 
a minimum of 20 hours of CPD activity each 
calendar year as part of your commitment to 
your ongoing professional development.


13
Candidate guide
5
7
2
1
4
6
3
Rules of Conduct
The 5 Rules of Conduct support positive change 
in the built and natural environments, through 
promoting and enforcing the highest ethical 
standards in valuation, the development and 
management of land, real estate, construction 
and infrastructure. 
1.	 Members and firms must be 
honest, act with integrity and 
comply with their professional 
obligations, including 
obligations to RICS
2.	 Members and firms must 
maintain their professional 
competence and ensure that 
services are provided by 
competent individuals who 
have the necessary expertise 
3.	 Members and firms must 
provide good-quality and 
diligent service
4.	 Members and firms must 
treat others with respect 
and encourage diversity and 
inclusion
5.	 Members and firms must act 
in the public interest, take 
responsibility for their actions 
and act to prevent harm and 
maintain public confidence in 
the profession
The Rules are based on ethical principles 
of honesty, integrity, competence, service, 
respect and responsibility. Professional ethical 
practice by RICS members and firms provides 
a foundation for effective markets, pioneers 
better places to live and work, and is a force for 
positive social impact. 
The Rules apply to all members (as defined in 
Bye-Law 5.1) and firms regulated by RICS.  RICS 
members and firms operate around the world, 
and the Rules of Conduct apply to members and 
firms wherever they work or practise.  Members 
and firms (in particular, their responsible 
principal) should be prepared to explain their 
actions and how they have complied with the 
Rules. 
Professionalism 
module
You are required to successfully complete 
the RICS Professionalism module prior to the 
final assessment. The module includes four 
e-learning modules and a test.
Please note once successfully completed this 
is valid for 12 months.
There will be a significant emphasis on the Rules 
of Conduct, professional practice and ethics in 
the interview, so you must familiarise yourself 
with the Rules. Please remember, you can be 
referred on this area alone. 
Plagiarism
RICS uses Turnitin, a system to help check 
candidates’ submissions are their own work and 
stand up to independent scrutiny. The system 
will compare a candidate’s submission against 
submissions from other candidates and other 
existing works. RICS reserve the right at any 
time either to submit or require you to submit 
your documentation into Turnitin. If the system 
flags concerns with the level of similarities 
between work you have submitted and existing 
works then we may refer the matter for further 
investigation which could result in disciplinary 
action being taken against you. In addition, 
the progress of your application may be 
impacted including potential removal from the 
assessment process pending the outcome of 
the investigation.


14
Candidate guide
5
7
2
1
4
6
3
Submissions
Summary of 
experience 
For your summary of experience, you must write 
a brief statement about each of your mandatory 
and technical competencies. It is important to 
ensure you have a copy of the pathway guide 
for your chosen pathway with you when you are 
completing this stage.
If the competency you select is a level 3 
competency, you should ensure you write the 
summary covering levels 1, 2 and 3. Level 3 
competencies are the most important: they are 
crucial to demonstrating that you practise at a 
professional level.
For level 1 you must provide a statement of 
learning – how you gained the knowledge and 
understanding. This should link to any relevant 
CPD in your CPD record.
For level 2 you must provide a statement of 
the range of experience you have achieved and 
include real-life project/process examples.
For level 3 you must provide a detailed 
statement of advice given and include real-life 
project/process examples where you have 
personally given advice.
Levels 2 and 3 require you to provide at least 
one example. The number of examples you need 
to provide will be determined by the experience 
and competence each example demonstrates. 
Remember, RICS is looking for evidence that you 
can do the relevant job at the required level: for 
some competencies one of your examples may 
be sufficient, for other competencies you may 
need to provide multiple examples.
Refer back to page 7 for more guidance.
Once you have completed the statements you 
should review them as a whole: together, they 
form your summary of experience. In addition to 
showing your abilities in individual competencies, 
they should provide the assessors with an 
overview of your training and experience, the 
work that you are doing and the levels you are 
working at.
Your summary of experience should be a 
maximum 1,500 words in total for the mandatory 
competencies and a maximum 4,000 words in 
total for the technical competencies. 
You may find the preliminary review feedback 
report template beneficial as a checklist to 
consider if you have met the submission 
requirements for the summary of experience. 
Case study 
submission
The case study is a maximum of 3,000 words, 
and must be on a project or projects that you 
have been personally involved in the two years 
prior to your assessment submission date. A 
project may have started over two years ago 
but your case study should reference your 
involvement in the past two years. It must 
provide a critical appraisal of the project(s) 
together with an outline of your learning 
outcomes. This provides important evidence of 
the competencies you have achieved.
The case study must give detailed evidence of 
your ability to work competently and to apply the 
knowledge relevant to your pathway. You will use 
this case study to make a 10-minute presentation 
to the final assessment panel. See section 9 for 
full details of the professional interview.
Your choice of project is very important 
and must reflect your specific APC pathway. 
You may have been working on a complex 
instruction or large project. Alternatively, 
the instruction or project may be more 
straightforward and not of great financial 
value. It may simply be typical of the work with 
which you have been involved. The project may 
include work undertaken outside your country 
of assessment.
Your case study validity will be calculated on 
a rolling period from the date you submit for 
assessment. You should check that activities 
you discuss in your case study are within the 
required 24 months, working back from the 
date you submit.
The assessors will be looking for you to have 
chosen a real life project that you have been 
involved in or may have led on. Consider a 
project process where you have had to deal with 
a key issue, anomaly or challenge that you have 
had the task of overcoming.
Make sure this relates to the competencies 
of your pathway demonstrating your 
professionalism and ability to problem solve. 
You are not necessarily expected to be running 
the project. It is your involvement or role in 
the team that you must outline, analyse and 
comment on. If the project has been running 
for some time, you may not have been involved 


15
Candidate guide
5
7
2
1
4
6
3
from the start, so your involvement may not 
have been continuous, or the project may not be 
finished when you prepare your case study. In 
this latter case, you should provide a prognosis of 
the outcome. If you know the outcome between 
sending in your case study and your interview 
then include this in your presentation.
You must explain not only the project itself but 
the processes you followed and the rationale 
behind your decision-making. Your focus must be 
on analysing the project: do not simply provide 
a summary of what it involved. It is quality not 
quantity that counts.
If at any time RICS staff discover your case 
study is over the word count they reserve the 
right to cancel your interview.
You should include the following four aspects:
1. Introduction
In this section you should provide a summary 
of the project and what your role was – include 
the following. We suggest this section should be 
approximately 500 words.
•	
What did you do?
•	
What was your level of responsibility?
•	
Who were the stakeholders?
•	
What was the timeline?
2. My approach
In this section you should describe the key 
issues or challenges on the project. You 
may write about one or more key issues but 
remember you only have a limited word count 
for the case study.
Explain the issues. Make it clear to the assessors 
why it became a challenge for you, include the 
options you considered and the solutions that 
you identified explaining why some options 
weren’t feasible.
3. My achievements
In this section you should describe what you 
achieved and how.
Demonstrate your ability to think logically, 
laterally and professionally giving examples of 
where you gave reasoned advice to a client for 
your level 3 competencies.
4. Conclusion
In this section you need to reflect on and 
analyse your performance and make reference 
to the lessons you learnt and what you would do 
differently next time.
This section is very important in showing the 
assessors your analytical thinking and how you 
develop as a professional.
The assessors will use your case study as a 
starting point to question you beyond what you 
actually did, probing your understanding of your 
project’s wider issues. You will need to think 
about these processes while you are writing 
your case study, so that you are well prepared 
for the interview. 
Appendix A – Competencies 
demonstrated in this case 
study
You need to use the template to list the 
mandatory and technical competencies that you 
believe are demonstrated in your case study.
Appendix B, C etc
You may insert illustrations, photographs or  
plans to this section. Please keep the 
attachments to a minimum ensuring they are 
relevant to the case study. Appendices should 
support your report, not add to or expand on it.


16
Candidate guide
5
7
2
1
4
6
3
Important notes on  
your submission
Confidentiality: you must ensure you have 
your employer’s and client’s consent to disclose 
any sensitive details in your submission. If you 
cannot get this consent you should disguise 
facts that might otherwise make the project 
identifiable. 
Similarly, commissions undertaken by you may 
have been litigious and confidential; you should 
explain this at the outset and change the name, 
location and function of the building/asset so 
that it would be unrecognisable.
The information contained in your submission 
will be treated as confidential by your panel of 
assessors and RICS.
References: extracts from Acts of Parliament, 
case law and other sources should not be 
quoted at length but essential references must 
be given.
Total word count: you must include a word count 
at the end of our case study. You can include 
notes on what you have included in the count. 
The assessors will be looking to see that you 
have kept within the prescribed word count for 
both your summary of experience and your case 
study.
Appendices: remember you need to use your 
appendices to support your case study and 
enhance the information you have given to the 
assessment panel. If it isn’t relevant, don’t use it.
Overview: while writing the case study you 
should be aware of what evidence you have 
already provided in your summary of experience 
and ensure that the level and scope of activities 
you are describing is consistent with what has 
been detailed in the summary.
The assessors will look at the summary of 
experience and case study individually, but 
will also take a holistic view. Review all your 
written evidence together before you submit 
it, and make sure there are no omissions or 
contradictions.
Finally, your submission must reflect your 
abilities in the following areas:
•	
written and graphic communication
•	
professional standards of organisation and 
presentation
•	
analysis, reflective thought and problem 
solving
•	
learning from experience gained.
You may find the preliminary review feedback 
report template beneficial as a checklist to 
consider if you have met the submission 
requirements for the case study. 
RICS staff reserve the right to cancel 
interviews if at any time it becomes known 
that the key assessment/submission criteria 
have not been met. This includes: word 
count, case study validity, professionalism 
module and test, plagiarism, fees, proposer 
and seconder confirmation, CPD, qualification 
and experience eligibility, and any other 
criteria set out in the RICS Regulations.


17
Candidate guide
5
7
2
1
4
6
3
Preliminary review
If you do not hold an RICS-accredited degree you 
will be required to submit your submission for a 
preliminary review. This review is carried out to 
determine if your submission is suitable for you 
to proceed to final assessment.
Your submission will be read and reviewed 
by a trained professional who has specialist 
knowledge in your field of practice. They will 
consider the totality of the evidence you have 
provided in your submission. The preliminary 
reviewer will seek to answer the question: Is the 
submission suitable for the APC assessors to 
prepare for and conduct the final assessment 
interview effectively?
All elements of your submission will be reviewed 
against the submission requirements. The 
requirements are divided into two sections on 
the preliminary review feedback report template:
A. 	 Format requirements – submission 
elements including compliance, standard of 
writing and RICS assessment requirements.
B.	 Content requirements – submission 
elements including mandatory 
competencies, technical competencies and 
the case study.
The preliminary reviewer will mark whether 
each element of your submission is suitable and 
provide feedback, where possible, if it is not. 
The reviewer may also provide feedback where 
the element is marked as suitable if they judge 
that the element could be improved prior to final 
assessment.
Outcomes
After submitting for your preliminary review you  
will receive one of the following outcomes.
Your submission is suitable for 
you to proceed
You may receive some additional advice from the 
reviewer, if appropriate, and the report will advise 
you of the next steps. You will now be eligible to 
apply for final assessment at the next available 
date.
You should now prepare for your final 
assessment. This can include an update to your 
summary of experience that reflects the work 
you have undertaken between preliminary 
review and submitting for your final assessment, 
especially where this will address feedback from 
the reviewer. This must not take your summary 
of experience over the word count.
Remember, your case study is only valid for a 
limited time as it must refer to experience within 
the last 24 months. If your case study is no 
longer within the 24-month period you are able 
to apply for the next available final assessment 
session in your market using the same case 
study. However, if you choose to apply for 
assessment at a later session your case study 
must be updated or changed, as appropriate, to 
meet the 24-month requirement.
The purpose of the review is to advise you on 
meeting the submission requirements, it is 
neither an assessment of your competence nor 
any form of guarantee of success at interview. It 
is only at interview that your competence against 
the pathway requirements will be assessed 
based on your final submission and how you 
perform in the interview.
Your submission is not 
currently suitable for you to 
proceed
The feedback report will explain why your 
submission has not been considered suitable 
to proceed to final assessment. The report will 
advise you of the steps you need to take in order 
to meet the submission requirements.
You will need to resubmit for preliminary review 
at the next available date.


18
Candidate guide
5
7
2
1
4
6
3
Final assessment interview 
Purpose
The interview will last approximately one hour 
and is designed to determine whether you:
•	
can express yourself clearly in an oral 
presentation and interview
•	
can demonstrate, in support of your written 
submissions, your understanding of the 
knowledge gained and competencies 
achieved during your training
•	
have an acceptable understanding of the 
role and responsibilities of a chartered 
surveyor
•	
can apply your professional and technical 
skills to benefit those who employ your 
services.
The interview will be conducted by a panel 
of assessors comprising a minimum of two  
(maximum three) RICS chartered professionals, 
trained and selected for this role. One assessor 
will perform the role of chairperson and is 
responsible for managing the interview process.
At the interview you will be questioned on:
•	
your presentation and case study
•	
your final assessment submissions including 
your CPD record
•	
the broader aspects of your experience and 
knowledge, including ethics, RICS Rules of 
Conduct and current issues of concern to  
the profession.
The assessors will base the questioning on the 
law and practice of the country in which your 
interview is being held. 
The assessors will normally ask you about what 
you did and about why you took a particular 
approach. They will also ask about your 
understanding of the wider issues surrounding 
your case study.
The assessors will be trying to determine your 
general level of ability; they do not expect you 
to be an expert in every area of professional 
activity. They will be looking to ensure you 
have achieved at least the minimum required 
levels of competence in key areas for the clients 
you serve, and that you understand the level 
of professional conduct expected of an RICS 
professional.
Remember the assessors will take a holistic view 
of your training, final assessment submissions, 
presentation and interview. Poor performance 
in one area may be balanced out by an excellent 
performance elsewhere.
RICS is looking for you to be not only technically 
competent, but also to
•	
be a good ambassador for the profession
•	
be aware of the professional and 
commercial implications of your work
•	
understand clients’ and employers’ 
objectives
•	
have up-to-date knowledge of legal matters
•	
have the confidence to work unsupervised.
The assessors may refer to your submission 
and any of their own preparation notes 
during the interview and may also be taking 
notes to support their questioning and 
decision-making. They may use printed 
documentation or electronic equipment to 
perform their role.


19
Candidate guide
5
7
2
1
4
6
3
Using the video call technology you will be able 
to share any content (for example, presentation 
slides, images, project documents) with the 
assessment panel. However, you should not 
rely heavily on the content; if for any reason the 
sharing of content is not possible you should 
ensure your presentation can be delivered 
effectively without it.
You can use speaker notes to deliver your 
presentation with any content you share 
but these are the only materials you can 
have access to. After the questions on your 
presentation you are not allowed to access 
any of the materials and may be asked to 
show that you have moved the materials out 
of your sight. At no point during the video call 
are you allowed access to your submission.
Structure
The interview will take place using video calling 
technology approved by RICS. Instructions on 
using the technology, including a tutorial and 
demonstration, are available separately.
When you join the video call the chairperson 
will welcome you, make some introductions and 
check that everything is set up appropriately 
before the interview officially starts. 
When everything is ready the chairperson will 
ask you to start your presentation. At this point, 
the one-hour time limit for the interview starts.
Time management
The chairperson is responsible for managing 
the timings of the interview. The 60 minutes 
is allocated to include your presentation, the 
assessors’ questions and your answers. If the 
interview is interrupted due to technology or 
other unforeseen issues the chairperson will 
extend the time of the interview accordingly 
to ensure the full 60 minutes is achieved as 
allocated. Any extension to achieve the full 
60 minutes is at the sole discretion of the 
chairperson, who has been trained to manage 
the interview timing and determine what 
accounts for an interruption. 
Presentation
You will give a 10 minute presentation to the 
assessment panel on any aspect of your case 
study. Try and pick a point from your case study 
to expand on in your presentation or detail the 
investigations and conclusions of your project.
Candidate’s presentation on case study
10 minutes
Questions on the presentation
10 minutes
Discussion on overall experience including CPD, technical competencies, 
Rules of Conduct and professional practice.
30 minutes
Chairperson’s areas of questioning may include professional and technical 
matters, CPD, Rules of Conduct and mandatory competencies; and close of 
the interview
10 minutes
Total
60 minutes
Special considerations – If you are aware 
of any circumstances that may affect your 
performance at the assessment then please 
ensure you alert RICS to this at the point of 
applying for your final assessment interview. 
To enable reasonable adjustment to be 
made to your interview RICS will require 
supporting medical evidence. Your local 
team will guide you through this.


20
Candidate guide
5
7
2
1
4
6
3
Audit and quality 
assurance
We are committed to ensuring rigorous 
processes for the chartered qualification 
(MRICS) so that employers, clients and the 
public can have confidence that anyone 
achieving it, is competent to practise as a 
Chartered Surveyor.
Use of video and microphone
You must have your video and microphone on 
throughout the video call so the assessment 
panel can be assured you do not have access 
to any support that provides, or could be 
perceived as providing, you with an advantage 
during the interview. 
Before the interview starts the chairperson 
will ask you to complete a 360-pan of your 
surroundings, including the area above you 
and desktop/floor area in front of you. The 
chairperson can request repeats of this 
procedure at any time during the interview or 
before the video call ends.
Under no circumstances must you record, or 
attempt to record, the video call or interview. 
Any knowledge or suspicion of you recording, 
or attempting to record, the video call or 
interview may result in the interview being 
terminated and we may refer the matter 
for further investigation that could result in 
disciplinary action being taken against you. 
In addition, your status as an RICS candidate 
may be impacted including potential removal 
from the assessment process pending the 
outcome of the investigation. 
Staff facilitator role
An RICS staff member trained to perform the 
staff facilitator role may be present on the 
video call. The purpose of the staff facilitator 
is to support you and the assessors with the 
use of the video call technology. They will not 
participate in the interview or any pre- or 
post-interview discussions with the panel. 
Their video will be off and microphone muted 
for the duration of the video call unless there 
is a technology issue or any other unforeseen 
issue that requires them to intervene. Any 
intervention by the staff facilitator would be 
recorded as an approved interruption by the 
chairperson.
Auditor role
An auditor trained by RICS may be present on 
the video call. The purpose of the auditor is to 
observe the performance of the assessment 
panel. They will not participate in the interview 
or any pre- or post-interview discussions 
with the panel; their role is simply to observe. 
They will use their video and microphone to 
introduce themselves before the interview 
starts; their video will be off and microphone 
muted for the duration of the interview 
unless they are instructed otherwise by the 
chairperson or staff facilitator.
The auditor report will also be used if 
the candidate appeals the result of their 
assessment.
Conflict of interest
RICS uses all reasonable endeavours to identify  
and avoid any obvious conflicts of interest 
when selecting a panel of assessors, prior to 
the interview going ahead. In the smaller RICS 
markets it can be much harder to avoid a conflict 
of interest as members are more likely to know 
one another in a professional capacity.
There are two main distinctions of a conflict of 
interest:
•	
‘Personal’ interests: in certain 
circumstances, there may be a connection 
between the assessor, and the candidate, 
but this may not present an issue to the 
candidate in practice.  
For instance, the individuals may have met 
at a CPD event or know of one another in a 
professional capacity.
•	
‘Prejudicial’ interests: where the assessor 
either stands to benefit from the outcome of 
an assessment interview or might otherwise 
be perceived as being influenced, the 
assessor must declare the conflict and 
should recuse themselves from the panel at 
the earliest opportunity.
In the unlikely event you do consider there is a 
conflict of interest on the actual interview day, 
you should declare this at the beginning of the 
interview, then the chairperson should decide 
whether the interview should go ahead with the 
panel member in question or whether the panel 
member should sit out of the interview. If it is 
only a two-person panel and a conflict is raised 
on the day of the interview and the chairperson 


21
Candidate guide
5
7
2
1
4
6
3
decides it is deemed a prejudicial conflict of 
interest then the interview will need to be 
deferred and rescheduled for another date.
After the assessment
You will receive your result within seven days of 
the interview.
Pass result
If you a receive a pass result you will be awarded 
the RICS chartered qualification (MRICS).
Referral result
If the outcome is a referral you will be sent 
a referral report within 21 days of the result 
explaining why the assessors reached this 
decision. To be eligible for re-assessment you 
must normally:
•	
complete some further relevant professional 
experience
•	
continue to complete your CPD, as required  
for your APC
•	
write a new case study or re-submit the same 
case study updated to reflect referral report 
feedback and meet criteria (see page 14)
•	
agree with your counsellor how you will 
address the deficiencies identified in the 
referral report and update your submission 
accordingly
•	
If you are following a structured training 
programme, you must continue to maintain 
and record your experience until you are 
successful.
The referral report is for you and your 
counsellor. It will not be made available to any 
future assessment panel and you should not 
make reference to any previous assessment 
in your submission.
Once you have completed the above, you 
will be ready for re-interview at the next 
available assessment. You will be reassessed 
on all the requirements of the APC including 
all competencies for your chosen pathway. 
The professional assessment takes a holistic 
approach.
Appeals
The appeal panel does not question the merits  
of the assessors’ decision. It looks at the 
way the assessment was conducted, and will 
allow the appeal only if, on the balance of 
probabilities,  
there was fault in the process. It does not reach  
any conclusion about your competence to  
practise: it considers only administrative or 
procedural matters.
When an appeal is made, it must:
•	
be in writing, accompanied by the  
appropriate fee
•	
be made by you and not a third party
•	
clearly state the grounds on which the  
appeal is being made.
You will have 21 days from the date of your 
referral report being issued by RICS to appeal. 
Details of how to appeal are on rics.org/
assessment
The appeal panel has no powers to award the 
RICS chartered qualification. 
•	
If an appeal is approved, the original final 
assessment interview is disregarded and you 
will be given a new interview based on your 
original assessment submission.
•	
If the appeal is dismissed the original 
assessment result will stand. 
Please note the appeal panel’s decision is final 
and there is no right to appeal this decision.


22
Candidate guide
5
7
2
1
4
6
3
Help and support 
There are many other people going through the 
APC at the same time as you, and many who  
have recently been through the APC. Make use  
of your local and virtual networking 
opportunities to engage with this rich 
environment of support and insight.
Contact your local RICS team to understand  
what is coming up and connect with the RICS 
Assessments Linkedin Group 
RICS offers a series of online, face-to-face and 
blended training courses that you should review. 
These cover both technical subjects and APC 
specific courses, aimed at giving you the support 
and understanding to help you through your 
APC. Visit rics.org/training


Americas, Europe, Middle East & Africa
Asia Pacific
UK & Ireland
aemea@rics.org
apac@rics.org
contactrics@rics.org
rics.org
Delivering confidence
We are RICS. Everything we do is designed to effect positive change in the built and natural 
environments. Through our respected global standards, leading professional progression  
and our trusted data and insight, we promote and enforce the highest professional standards  
in the development and management of land, real estate, construction and infrastructure.  
Our work with others provides a foundation for confident markets, pioneers better places  
to live and work and is a force for positive social impact. 


